Full documentation about extending the plugin (#27)
IBM/sonar-cryptography: docs/LANGUAGE_SUPPORT.md

> [!TIP]
> If your language is already supported by our plugin, you can directly skip to [the section](#adding-support-for-another-cryptography-library) explaining in detail how to add support for a cryptography library.

Recall that only languages supported for SonarQube plugins are supported (they are listed [here](https://docs.sonarsource.com/sonarqube/latest/extension-guide/adding-coding-rules/#custom-rule-support-by-language) in the *Java* column), because they come with a sonar analyzer and API.

> [!NOTE]  
> If you really want to add support for a language that is not supported for SonarQube plugins, it may be possible to use a third-party analyzer and integrate with SonarQube using [generic formatted issue reports](https://docs.sonarsource.com/sonarqube/latest/analyzing-source-code/importing-external-issues/generic-issue-import-format/).
> However, this has not been attempted yet and will probably result in significantly more work.

In the following, we will take the example of adding support for the Java language.

> ### Adding the language analyzer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Adding the language parser
```

> The first step is to add a dependency for your sonar language analyzer to the main `sonar-cryptography` [`pom.xml`](../pom.xml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step is to add a dependency for your sonar language parser to the main `sonar-cryptography` [`pom.xml`](../pom.xml).
```

> You should find information about the analyzer group and artifact identifiers in the appropriate language page of the [documentation of sonar languages](https://docs.sonarsource.com/sonarqube/latest/analyzing-source-code/languages/overview/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should find a parser for your language by searching the parser provided by Sonar directly ([see](https://github.com/search?q=topic%3Alanguage-team+org%3ASonarSource+&type=repositories)) or by searching for parsers created by the community, such as the one for C/C++ ([see](https://github.com/SonarOpenCommunity/sonar-cxx))
```

Then, first add its version under `<!-- language parser versions -->`:
```xml
<sonar.java.version>7.35.0.36271</sonar.java.version>
```

And add the dependency (using this version reference) under `<!-- language supporters -->`:
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.sonarsource.java</groupId>
    <artifactId>sonar-java-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>${sonar.java.version}</version>
</dependency>
```

### Identifying the four classes to use in generics

> Recall that our methodology aims to bridge the gap between the language-specific sonar APIs and a higher level language-agnostic API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recall that our methodology aims to bridge the gap between the language-specific parser APIs and a higher level language-agnostic API.
```

As explained earlier, this part is done in the [engine](#the-engine).
While we will talk [later](#implementing-the-language-specific-parts-of-the-engine) about how to integrate a new language with the engine, we have to highlight that our methodology makes use of [Java generic types](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/generics/types.html) at multiple places. In particular, our language-"agnostic" high level API still needs to be parametrized by language-dependent types.

> We need to find four of these types in the sonar API of the language of your choice, and it is crucial to make this step early in the development, as not finding these types may compromise completely the possibility of extending our plugin with this language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to find these four types in the language's (Sonar) parser API. It is crucial to take this step early in the development, as not finding these types can compromise the integration of the language with the chosen parser.
```

### Implementing the language-specific parts of the engine

Here are all the interfaces that have to be implemented (specific details about the functions to implement may be documented in the interface files):

- [`IBaseMethodVisitor`](../engine/src/main/java/com/ibm/engine/detection/IBaseMethodVisitor.java) (the class implementing this interface must also extend a language-specific `BaseTreeVisitor` from the sonar API: see [`JavaBaseMethodVisitor`](../engine/src/main/java/com/ibm/engine/language/java/JavaBaseMethodVisitor.java) for example)
- [`IDetectionEngine`](../engine/src/main/java/com/ibm/engine/detection/IDetectionEngine.java)
- [`ILanguageSupport`](../engine/src/main/java/com/ibm/engine/language/ILanguageSupport.java)
- [`ILanguageTranslation`](../engine/src/main/java/com/ibm/engine/language/ILanguageTranslation.java)
- [`IScanContext`](../engine/src/main/java/com/ibm/engine/language/IScanContext.java)

Notice that these interfaces are parametrized by the generics mentioned [previously](#identifying-the-four-classes-to-use-in-generics).

> [!TIP]

> > Implementing these classes may be the most challenging part of the process, as it requires to bridge the gap between the language-specific API of your sonar analyzer (that it usually poorly documented) and the engine primitives (that are not documented yet).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Implementing these classes may be the most challenging part of the process, as it requires to bridge the gap between the language-specific APIs (usually poorly documented) and the engine primitives (that are not documented yet).
```

> Moreover, there is currently no proper way to test your engine implementation without writing detection rules (which will have to be done later).
>
> We therefore advise the following development process: try your best to implement these interfaces by reading their javadoc, understanding what they are supposed to do and checking how they were implemented for other languages.

> > Hopefully, your sonar analyzer has a relatively similar API as the others, and you can reuse parts of the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Hopefully, your parser has a relatively similar API as the others, and you can reuse parts of the code.
```

The `test/` directory is not important at the beginning, it will be used only once we write detection rules, and we will cover it [later](#adding-support-for-another-cryptography-library).

### Adding the extension points

Then, we have to add *extension points*: these are language-specific interfaces to implement in order to declare the custom detection rules of the module to the plugin. Read the sonar documentation to find what these interfaces are. For Java, these are the interfaces `RulesDefinition` and `CheckRegistrar`, respectively implemented in [`JavaScannerRuleDefinition`](../java/src/main/java/com/ibm/plugin/JavaScannerRuleDefinition.java) and [`JavaCheckRegistrar`](../java/src/main/java/com/ibm/plugin/JavaCheckRegistrar.java) in the `plugin` directory.

> [!IMPORTANT]  
> At this point, we have to clarify an important difference: we distinguish the SonarQube *rules* that we actually add to the plugin, and the detection *rules* (defined [earlier](#the-detection-rules)) that are rules written with our high level syntax and conforming to the `IDetectionRule` interface.
>

> > In our plugin architecture, we make the choice to define a **single** SonarQube rule per language, which contains the logic of all detection rules. This rule extends a language-specific class defined by your sonar analyzer API, like `IssuableSubscriptionVisitor` in Java or `PythonVisitorCheck` in Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In our plugin architecture, we have chosen to define detection rules independently of the higher-level SonarQube rules that you see in the UI. The detection rules are there to collect all possible cryptographic information, while the SonarQube rules can be defined on top of these detections. The idea is that a SonarQube rule can be: `Don't use MD5` or `If using RSA, the key size should be larger than 2048`, while the detection rules try to capture all occurrences of these algorithms in the source code.  At the moment, the plugin only contains an `Inventory` rule that collects all occurrences of cryptographic assets and reports them as a problem to the SonarQube UI. This rule extends a language-specific class defined by the API of your Sonar analyzer, such as `IssuableSubscriptionVisitor` in Java or `PythonVisitorCheck` in Python.
```

#### The "Check Registrar" extension point

If there is a similar entry point for your language, you can set it up similarly to [`JavaCheckRegistrar`](../java/src/main/java/com/ibm/plugin/JavaCheckRegistrar.java) in Java (or to [`PythonCheckRegistrar`](../python/src/main/java/com/ibm/plugin/PythonCheckRegistrar.java) with the `PythonCustomRuleRepository` interface).

This is the place where the SonarQube rule class should be referenced. Because this rule "regroups" all the detection rules, we call it the *inventory rule*, which is defined in Java as [`JavaInventoryRule`](../java/src/main/java/com/ibm/plugin/rules/JavaInventoryRule.java) in `plugin/rules`[^2].

[^2]: In the Java case, we define an intermediary class [`JavaRuleList`](../java/src/main/java/com/ibm/plugin/JavaRuleList.java) that registers all Java SonarQube rules, which in our case is only [`JavaInventoryRule`](../java/src/main/java/com/ibm/plugin/rules/JavaInventoryRule.java). This allows us to easily refer to all SonarQube rules at other places, like in [`JavaScannerRuleDefinition`](../java/src/main/java/com/ibm/plugin/JavaScannerRuleDefinition.java).

> This rule must extend the language-specific sonar visitor class, `IssuableSubscriptionVisitor` in Java, and must be annotated with a name (we are using "Inventory"):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SonarQube rules must extend the language-specific sonar visitor class, `IssuableSubscriptionVisitor` in Java, and must be annotated with a name (we are using "Inventory"):
```

 *
 * @param tree The tree node to visit.
 */
@Override
public void visitNode(@Nonnull Tree tree) {
    detectionRules.forEach(
        rule -> {
            DetectionExecutive<JavaCheck, Tree, Symbol, JavaFileScannerContext>
                detectionExecutive =
                    JavaAggregator.getLanguageSupport()
                        .createDetectionExecutive(
                            tree, rule, new JavaScanContext(this.context));
            detectionExecutive.subscribe(this);
            detectionExecutive.start();
        });
}
```

Here, for each visited node of the AST and for each `IDetectionRule` detection rule, we enable a [`DetectionExecutive`](../engine/src/main/java/com/ibm/engine/executive/DetectionExecutive.java), which is a class from the engine that will take care of applying our detection rules.

Additionally, the intermediary class (`JavaBaseDetectionRule` in Java) should implement the [`IObserver`](../common/src/main/java/com/ibm/common/IObserver.java) interface, consisting of an `update` method. This function will be called each time the scanner detects a finding, and will pass the finding as a parameter.

> SonarQube indeed reports each asset as they are detected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> But if we want to export all of our findings in a single output structure, like a CBOM, we need some way to aggregate all results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we want to export all of our findings in a single output structure, like a CBOM, we need some way to aggregate all results.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This is therefore the purpose of the (empty) interface [`IAggregator`](../output/src/main/java/com/ibm/output/IAggregator.java), implemented in Java by the class [`JavaAggregator`](../java/src/main/java/com/ibm/plugin/JavaAggregator.java) directly in the `plugin` directory.
The aggregator class can maintain a list of findings, that gets extended each time a new finding is detected and reported through the `update` function.
It also implements a `getLanguageSupport()` method that returns the `ILanguageSupport` (using the `LanguageSupporter` defined [earlier](#implementing-the-language-specific-parts-of-the-engine)), which you should use in your "visit" method (like in `visitNode` above).
The `JavaAggregator` implementation is quite generic and can be mostly reused for your implementation, after replacing the generic types by the correct ones, and using the correct language supporter.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!TIP]
> By extending the `JavaBaseDetectionRule` class, you can create new high-level SonarQube rules beyond the Inventory rule. The `JavaInventoryRule` is an example of how the underlying cryptographic information (collected by the detection rules) can be utilized. 
```
